| Previous | Next           |
| -------- | -------------- |
| None     | [[06-04@1400]] |
# BeeHive Meeting #1 @10:00 AM
#### Summary:
* Review of how BEEHIVE came to be
	* There’s a prof named TM Murali from Virginia Tech
		* Anna worked under him as a postdoc on Signaling Pathway Reconstruction (SPR)
	* There is also a prof named Tony Gitter from UW - Madison
		* Tony and Anna worked together to build tools to run SPR methods ([[SPRAS]])
			* Inspired by BeeLine which Murali worked on
	* Tony and Anna wrote a grant to fund a project named BEEHIVE
		* A suite of tools for network biology applications
			* Like Beeline, SPRAS, and (??? New project)
* Gabe and Schwa are working on contributing to SPRAS, and creating benchmark standards for BeeHive

## What is signaling pathway reconstruction (SPR)?

We are looking at cells, and how cells make decisions.

Picture two cells (human for simplicity’s sake). Every cell has the same DNA, but different cells have different segments of DNA that are “expressed” (changing the cell’s function).

These expressions are not due to DNA change, but due to building blocks that are available for the cell. Imagine the cell has proteins A, B, C, X, Y

Suppose a cell receives a signal “grow”. THe cell membrane has receptor proteins that look for certain molecules. So the signal ‘grow’ is actually a collection of molecules. If a receptor protein captures or binds to a receptor protein, its state changes. In this case, the receptor looks to bind to protein B, which then binds to protein X, which binds to protein Y, which instructs the nucleus to produce more of protein A. This is called a signaling cascade.

Note, proteins that bind/act on DNA are called “transcription factors”, and messages are passed through the cell through signaling cascades, and transcription factors (called signaling pathways).

Note, this example is a massive oversimplification. Some pathways may trigger other operations in the cell, and we do not have a good handle on the full scope of signaling pathways.
## How does this apply to CS?

The goal of SPR is to identify new proteins and protein-protein interactions PPIs) in a pathway.

The way we can do that is through analyzing network graphs.

Suppose (with our earlier example), that the receptors are the “start” of the signaling pathway for growth, and that the XY transcription factors are the “end” of the signaling pathway. How can we figure out what happens in between?

Turn all the interactions into a massive graph (where interactions are recorded through multiple experiments and observations). In this graph, the vertices are proteins, and the edges are the observed or known interactions between two proteins. These edges are the PPI. **NOTE:** For this project, combined proteins are represented as the subgraph of individual proteins and their interactions (if A connects to B, we don’t have a node AB, we just have A — B)

In humans, there are around ~20,000 proteins/nodes, and ~500k interactions. We want to find a subset of these interactions from a source set of notes, to a target set of nodes. The graphs can be directed, and can be weighted.

## Where do we come in?

Our project, is to implement more methods and algorithms. Also, we want to take current research, and try to reproduce the results using SPRAS (this leads more into benchmarking).

more projects may come in down the line...
